In my previous video, I went over how AI
agent can store memories. But this is
only half the problem. These files
aren't useful if you don't have an
effective way to load them into context
at the right times. So, how do agents
actually read and use the memory? In
this video, we're diving into how agents
find the proper memory entries at the
right time. We're covering a few key
pillars. First, keyword search versus
semantic search. Second, why a hybrid
approach is actually the answer. Third,
reranking and what it means for your AI
systems. And finally, a real world
example. We'll take a look at how it all
works inside of Open Claw.
Finding memory entries via keyword
search is the easiest to implement.
Cloud Code heavily relies on tools like
GP to find what it needs. It's all about
literal word matches. Interestingly, the
Cloud Code team started with a vector
database, but they found a GP at aentic
search actually performed better and was
easier to maintain. A step up from basic
GP is an algorithm called BM25. Instead
of just finding matches, it ranks them
based on relevance. It factors in how
often a term appears and how unique that
term is across your content. This is
what powers full text search in
databases like Seagull's FTS5 extension.
Keyword search looks for content based
on matching keywords you provide to the
text. Semantic search is different. The
goal is to search by meaning and intent,
not just literal words.
To do this, the text gets converted into
embeddings. An embedding is a list of
numbers that represents the meaning of
text. For example, how do I speed up my
app? Might become a vector with
potentially over a thousand values. Each
number represents some aspect of meaning
behind a text.
Here's the magic. Text with similar
meaning ends up having similar numbers.
The phrase, "How do I speed up my app?"
and tips for improving applications
performance produce similar lists of
numbers, but best restaurants near me
produce vastly different numbers because
it's unrelated.
To generate those embeddings, you can
use an external service or an open-
source option. OpenI's embeddings API is
one of the most popular. Their embedding
model has been trained on massive
amounts of text to understand
relationships between words and
concepts. You send a text and get back
an embedding.
You don't need to understand the math
behind how embeddings are generated to
use them. Once you have a way to map
text to meaning, you need a way to store
and search across possibly thousands or
millions of embeddings. This is where
vector databases come in. You can use a
dedicated vector database like pine
cone. Or if you're just starting out,
popular databases like Postgress and
even SQLite have extensions to support
vector search. These are PG vector and
SQLite vect. Open claw uses SQLite and
SQLite vec. We'll dig into that more in
a moment. With text converted to
embeddings and stored in the vector
database, let's talk about how search
actually works. A typical search has two
steps. First, you take the user's query
and you convert it into an embedding
itself. Second, you take that embedding
and search across the vector database.
This search uses mathematical distance
between vectors, how close or far apart
they are in meaning. The most common
approach is called nearest neighbor
search. Think of it like plotting
coordinates on a map. Your search query
is where you are. The content in the
database are all the other text
embeddings. The closer a dot is on the
map to your position, the more related
it is. The difference is that embeddings
have hundreds or even thousands of
dimensions. Searching embeddings one at
a time works for small data sets, but at
scale you need a special index. Vector
databases typically use an approximate
nearest neighbor algorithm. This trades
some accuracy for speed, but in
practice, the trade-off is negligible.
results are almost identical but
significantly faster.
You might think semantic search is the
complete answer but it has its
drawbacks. Semantic search does not
perform well for literal string
searches. For example, looking for an
error code like error connection
refused. Semantic search may not find
irrelevant results. If you're looking
for a function like say use state, the
same problem might happen. It can't
reliably handle exact text matches and
specific identifiers. The answer is to
combine both of these approaches. Run
both a keyword search and a semantic
search in parallel. Then use a technique
called fusion to combine the results.
There are two common approaches. First,
there's weighted score fusion. This
takes the scores from both searches and
combines them with weights. Open claw
uses this approach. They weigh vector
scores at about 70% and keyword scores
at 30%.
Second, there's reciprocal rank fusion
or RRF. You take two separately ranked
searches, semantic and keyword. Instead
of using raw scores, RRF looks at where
each result ranked in both searches. A
result that ranked number two in
semantic search and number three in
keyword gets a combined score based on
both of those positions. Results that
show up near the top in both lists
naturally bubble up to the top of the
final results.
Weighted fusion gives you more control
and preserves how strong each individual
match was. RF is simpler, but treats a
near-perfect match the same as a decent
one. It only cares about position, not
strength. Choose based on your needs.
Now that we have a combined result using
Fusion, we have a ranked list. But this
ranking is based on purely math, vector
distances, and keyword scores. it
doesn't have the ability to understand
nuance of what the user is actually
looking for. Reranking is a technique
where you take these results and pass
them to a model that can evaluate each
result against the user's original
query. The model then applies a nuance
judgment about relevance. It could be an
LLM or a specialized model like cohhere.
The trade-off cost and latency. Adding
another step and potentially another API
call means that there's more time before
getting the final results. If you're
wondering why not just start with an LM
for search, the answer is going to be
speed and context window limits. The
initial search needs to scan thousands
of embeddings quickly. Ranking is slower
but more accurate. That's fine. You've
already offloaded the bulk of the search
and you're providing it with a refined
set of results to rerank.
Now, let's take a look at a real world
example in OpenClaw. In my last video, I
mentioned that OpenClaw uses markdown
files for memory, but it also has a
memory management feature. It supports
two systems for memory backend. The
default system uses SQLite and vector
embeddings. An optional system is
managed by QMD which is an open source
library by Toby Lutkkey. In this video,
we're going to cover the default system.
The default memory layer requires an
embedding provider to be configured.
Open clause supports four options.
First, a local model available via OAMA.
Second, OpenAI via text embedding 3
small. Third, Google Gemini via Gemini
embedding 001. And fourth, Voyage AI via
Voyage for large. You can specify which
provider to use in your configuration or
you can leave it set to auto. In auto
mode, Open Claw checks for a local model
first. If it's not available, it tries
each remote provider in order. OpenAI,
Gemini, then Voyage. It uses whichever
API key is configured. If none are
available, then memory search is simply
disabled. The default system stores
everything in a single SQLite database.
A few key tables power this. The files
table tracks each memory file. It stores
the path, a content hash, and the last
modified time. This enables incremental
syncing. The chunks table is where
things get interesting.
Openclaw doesn't embed entire files.
Instead, it breaks markdown files into
chunks of roughly 400 tokens with an 80
token overlap between chunks. Each chunk
stores its text, the embedding vector,
and the line range it came from in the
original file. That line range is what
lets the agent site exactly where a
memory came from.
Then there are two virtual tables that
power the actual search. Chunks FTS is
an FTS5 full text search table. It
enables BM25 keyword ranking. Chunks vec
is a SQLite vect table that stores
embeddings as flow 32 arrays for cosign
similarity search. There's also an
embedding cache table. This caches
embeddings by a hash of the input text.
It's key to the provider and model. So
if you rechunk a file but that text
hasn't changed, it skips the embedding
API call entirely. This is a nice cost
optimization since embedding calls can
add up pretty quickly.
Now for search itself, when the agent
calls the memory search tool, here's
what happens under the hood. The query
text gets embedded using the same
provider that indexed the files. Then
two searches run in parallel. The
keyword search tokenizes the query and
runs them against the FTS5 table. BM25
ranks the results. Those raw ranks get
converted from a 0 to1 score using the
formula 1 / 1 plus the rank. The vector
search takes the query embedding. It
uses SQLite's vec distance cosine
functionality to find the nearest
chunks. The cosine distance gets flipped
into a similarity score one minus the
distance.
Both searches use a candidate
multiplier. If you ask for six results,
each search actually returns up to 24
candidates. That 4x multiplier gives the
fusion step more to work with. Then the
weighted score fusion combines them.
0.7 times the vector score plus 0.3
times the text score.
Results that appear in both searches get
both scores combined. Results from only
one search get zero for the other. After
fusion, everything is sorted by the
final score. It's filtered by the
minimum threshold of 0.35 and capped the
requested result count.
Open claw exposes two tools for the
agent to interact with memory. First,
there's memory search. The system
describes it as a mandatory recall step.
Its prompt tells the agent to search
memory before answering questions about
prior work, decisions, dates, people,
preferences, or to-dos. The tool takes a
query string and optionally a max
results count and a minimum score
threshold. It returns an array of
snippets. Each has the file path, line
numbers, relevant score, and a text
preview of up to 700 characters. It also
includes citation information so that
the agent can reference exactly where
the memory came from. The second
available tool is the memory get tool.
This is the follow-up tool. After
finding relevant results with a search,
the agent can use memory get to read
specific section of a memory file. It
takes a file path, an optional starting
line number, and an optional line count.
This lets the agent pull just the right
context it needs without loading the
entire files into the context window.
This two-step pattern of search then get
is deliberate. The search returns just
enough context to decide what's
relevant. Then the agent fetches only
the specific content it actually needs.
It keeps the context window lean and
efficient.
The last piece of the puzzle is how
memory files become searchable. Open
claw uses an incremental sync system
with multiple triggers. A file watcher
monitors the memory MD file and the
memory directory. When a file changes,
the watcher debounces for about 1 and a
half seconds. It marks the index as
dirty and then it triggers a sync.
During the sync, OpenClaw lists all the
memory files. It compares each file's
content hash against what's stored in
the files table. If the hash matches,
that file is skipped entirely. Only
files that actually changed get
rechunked and re-mbed. This is where the
efficiency happens. When a file does
need updating, it gets split into those
roughly 400 token chunks. Each chunk's
text is hashed and checked against the
embeddings cache. If there's a cache
hit, the embedding is reused. Otherwise,
a new embedding is generated via the
configured provider. All of this runs
with a concurrency limit to avoid
overwhelming the embedding API. There's
also a full reindex trigger. If the
embedding provider or model changes or
if the chunk size configuration changes,
OpenClaw detects the mismatch in its
metadata table. It rebuilds the entire
index from scratch. It does this safely
by building the new index into a
temporary database. Then it atomically
swaps it into place. For session
transcripts, there's a delta tracking
system. It monitors how many bytes and
messages have accumulated since the last
sync. Once a threshold has crossed, it
triggers a sync for just those session
files. The entire system ensures that
the agents memory stays searchable
without expensive full reindex operation
on every change. That's the complete
picture. From storing memories to
searching them to keeping them in sync,
OpenClaw's memory system is a
masterclass in practical AI
architecture.
Thanks for watching. If you found this
breakdown helpful, please like and
subscribe. And if you're curious about
running OpenClaw yourself or want to
learn more about building AI systems
with cloud code, check out the links in
the description. I'll see you in the
next one.